README.md, before:

# Laravel Log Shipper

[![Tests](https://github.com/ADMIN-INTELLIGENCE-GmbH/laravel-log-shipper/actions/workflows/tests.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/ADMIN-INTELLIGENCE-GmbH/laravel-log-shipper/actions/workflows/tests.yml)
[![Latest Version on Packagist](https://img.shields.io/packagist/v/adminintelligence/laravel-log-shipper.svg)](https://packagist.org/packages/adminintelligence/laravel-log-shipper)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/packagist/l/adminintelligence/laravel-log-shipper.svg)](https://packagist.org/packages/adminintelligence/laravel-log-shipper)

A Laravel package that ships your application logs to a central server.

## Companion Service: Logger

This package is designed to work with [**Logger**](https://github.com/ADMIN-INTELLIGENCE-GmbH/logger) — a centralized log aggregation service built with Laravel.

**Logger provides:**
- **Web Dashboard** — Search, filter, and browse logs with pagination
- **Multi-Project Support** — Manage logs from multiple applications with isolated project keys
- **Failing Controllers Report** — Identify error hotspots by controller
- **Retention Policies** — Configurable per-project log retention (7, 14, 30, 90 days, or infinite)
- **Webhook Notifications** — Slack/Discord/Mattermost-compatible alerts for errors and critical events
- **Dark Mode** — Full dark theme support

> **Note:** You can also use this package with any HTTP endpoint that accepts JSON log payloads.

## Requirements

- PHP 8.1 or higher
- Laravel 10, 11, or 12
- A queue driver (recommended: Redis, database, or SQS)

## Installation

```bash
composer require adminintelligence/laravel-log-shipper
```

## Configuration

Publish the configuration file:

```bash
php artisan vendor:publish --tag=log-shipper-config
```

Add the following to your `.env` file:

```
LOG_SHIPPER_ENABLED=true
LOG_SHIPPER_ENDPOINT=https://your-log-server.com/api/ingest
LOG_SHIPPER_KEY=your-project-api-key
LOG_SHIPPER_QUEUE=redis
LOG_SHIPPER_QUEUE_NAME=logs
```

## Usage

Add the log shipper channel to your `config/logging.php`:

```php
'channels' => [
    'stack' => [
        'driver' => 'stack',
        'channels' => ['daily', 'log_shipper'],
        'ignore_exceptions' => false,
    ],

    'log_shipper' => [
        'driver' => 'custom',
        'via' => \AdminIntelligence\LogShipper\Logging\CreateCustomLogger::class,
        'level' => 'error', // Only ship errors and above
    ],
    
    // ... other channels
],
```

Now any log at the configured level or above will be shipped to your central server:

```php
Log::error('Something went wrong', ['order_id' => 123]);
```

## Configuration Options

| Option | Description | Default |
|--------|-------------|---------|
| `enabled` | Enable/disable log shipping | `true` |
| `api_endpoint` | The URL of your log server | - |
| `api_key` | Your project's API key | - |
| `queue_connection` | Queue connection to use | `default` |
| `queue_name` | Queue name for log jobs | `default` |
| `sanitize_fields` | Fields to redact from logs | See config |
| `send_context` | Context data to include | See config |

## Log Payload

When a log event is shipped, the following data is sent:

### Core Log Data (Always Sent)

| Field | Type | Description |
|-------|------|-------------|
| `level` | string | Log level (error, warning, info, debug, etc.) |
| `message` | string | The log message |
| `context` | array | Any context array passed to the log call |
| `datetime` | string | Timestamp in `Y-m-d H:i:s.u` format |
| `channel` | string | The logging channel name |
| `extra` | array | Additional Monolog processor data |

### Optional Context Data

These fields can be toggled via the `send_context` configuration:

| Field | Type | Default | Description |
|-------|------|---------|-------------|
| `user_id` | int\|null | enabled | Authenticated user's ID |
| `ip_address` | string\|null | enabled | Client IP address |
| `user_agent` | string\|null | enabled | Browser/client user agent string |
| `request_method` | string\|null | enabled | HTTP method (GET, POST, PUT, DELETE, etc.) |
| `request_url` | string\|null | enabled | Full request URL including query string |
| `route_name` | string\|null | enabled | Laravel route name |
| `controller_action` | string\|null | enabled | Controller and action handling the request |
| `app_env` | string\|null | enabled | Application environment (local, staging, production) |
| `app_debug` | bool\|null | enabled | Whether debug mode is enabled |
| `referrer` | string\|null | enabled | HTTP Referer header |

To disable specific context fields, update your `config/log-shipper.php`:

```php
'send_context' => [
    'user_id' => true,
    'ip_address' => true,
    'user_agent' => false, // disabled
    // ...
],
```

### Example Log Payload

Here is an example of the JSON payload sent for a log event:

```json
{
    "level": "error",
    "message": "Order processing failed",
    "context": {
        "order_id": 12345,
        "reason": "Payment declined"
    },
    "datetime": "2025-12-11 14:30:45.123456",
    "channel": "local",
    "extra": {},
    "user_id": "1",
    "ip_address": "127.0.0.1",
    "user_agent": "Mozilla/5.0...",
    "request_method": "POST",
    "request_url": "https://api.example.com/orders",
    "route_name": "orders.store",
    "controller_action": "App\\Http\\Controllers\\OrderController@store",
    "app_env": "production",
    "app_debug": false
}
```

## Status Monitoring

The package can automatically push system health metrics to your log server on a configurable interval. This helps you monitor the health of your application instances.

### Enable Status Push

Add the following to your `.env` file:

```env
LOG_SHIPPER_STATUS_ENABLED=true
LOG_SHIPPER_STATUS_INTERVAL=300 # seconds (default: 5 minutes)
```

By default, status updates are sent to `/stats` relative to your log endpoint (e.g., `https://your-log-server.com/api/stats`). You can override this:

```env
LOG_SHIPPER_STATUS_ENDPOINT=https://your-log-server.com/api/custom-stats
```

### Collected Metrics

> **Note:** Status pushing relies on Laravel's scheduler. Ensure you have the scheduler running:
> `* * * * * cd /path-to-your-project && php artisan schedule:run >> /dev/null 2>&1`

### Example Status Payload

Here is an example of the JSON payload sent for a status update:

```json
{
    "timestamp": "2025-12-11T14:30:45+00:00",
    "app_name": "Laravel",
    "app_env": "production",
    "instance_id": "web-server-01",
    "system": {
        "memory_usage": 25165824,
        "memory_peak": 26214400,
        "php_version": "8.3.0",
        "laravel_version": "11.0.0",
        "uptime": 86400,
        "disk_space": {
            "total": 100000000000,
            "free": 60000000000,
            "used": 40000000000,
            "percent_used": 40.0
        }
    },
    "queue": {
        "size": 15,
        "connection": "redis"
    },
    "database": {
        "status": "connected",
        "latency_ms": 1.2
    },
    "cache": {
        "driver": "redis"
    },
    "filesize": {
        "laravel.log": 102400
    }
}
```

## Data Sanitization jobs count (excluding the status job itself)
- **Database**: Connection status and latency
- **Cache**: Active cache driver
- **Filesize**: Sizes of specific monitored files (configurable)

To configure which metrics are sent or to monitor specific files, publish the config and update the `status` section:

```php
'status' => [
    'metrics' => [
        'system' => true,
        'queue' => true,
        'database' => true,
        'cache' => true,
        'filesize' => true,
    ],

    'monitored_files' => [
        storage_path('logs/laravel.log'),
        storage_path('logs/worker.log'),
    ],
],
```

> **Note:** Status pushing relies on Laravel's scheduler. Ensure you have the scheduler running:
> `* * * * * cd /path-to-your-project && php artisan schedule:run >> /dev/null 2>&1`

## Data Sanitization

The package automatically redacts sensitive fields from your logs. The following field patterns are redacted by default:

| Field Pattern | Examples |
|---------------|----------|
| `password` | password, user_password, password_hash |
| `password_confirmation` | password_confirmation |
| `credit_card` | credit_card, credit_card_number |
| `card_number` | card_number |
| `cvv` | cvv, card_cvv |
| `api_key` | api_key, stripe_api_key |
| `secret` | secret, client_secret |
| `token` | token, access_token, refresh_token |
| `authorization` | authorization |

Add additional fields to sanitize in the config file:

```php
'sanitize_fields' => [
    'password',
    'credit_card',
    'ssn', // add your own
    // ...
],
```

## Sync Mode

By default, logs are shipped via queued jobs for better performance. If you prefer synchronous shipping (useful for debugging or simple setups), set:

```env
LOG_SHIPPER_QUEUE=sync
```

> **Note:** Sync mode will block your application until the HTTP request completes. Use queued mode in production for better performance.

## Contributing

Please see [CONTRIBUTING.md](CONTRIBUTING.md) for details.

## Security

If you discover a security vulnerability, please see [SECURITY.md](SECURITY.md) for reporting instructions.

## License

The MIT License (MIT). Please see [LICENSE](LICENSE) for more information.

Commit message:

feat: enhance status monitoring with configurable endpoint and interval settings

README.md, after:

# Laravel Log Shipper

[![Tests](https://github.com/ADMIN-INTELLIGENCE-GmbH/laravel-log-shipper/actions/workflows/tests.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/ADMIN-INTELLIGENCE-GmbH/laravel-log-shipper/actions/workflows/tests.yml)
[![Latest Version on Packagist](https://img.shields.io/packagist/v/adminintelligence/laravel-log-shipper.svg)](https://packagist.org/packages/adminintelligence/laravel-log-shipper)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/packagist/l/adminintelligence/laravel-log-shipper.svg)](https://packagist.org/packages/adminintelligence/laravel-log-shipper)

A Laravel package that ships your application logs to a central server.

## Companion Service: Logger

This package is designed to work with [**Logger**](https://github.com/ADMIN-INTELLIGENCE-GmbH/logger) — a centralized log aggregation service built with Laravel.

**Logger provides:**
- **Web Dashboard** — Search, filter, and browse logs with pagination
- **Multi-Project Support** — Manage logs from multiple applications with isolated project keys
- **Failing Controllers Report** — Identify error hotspots by controller
- **Retention Policies** — Configurable per-project log retention (7, 14, 30, 90 days, or infinite)
- **Webhook Notifications** — Slack/Discord/Mattermost-compatible alerts for errors and critical events
- **Dark Mode** — Full dark theme support

> **Note:** You can also use this package with any HTTP endpoint that accepts JSON log payloads.

## Requirements

- PHP 8.1 or higher
- Laravel 10, 11, or 12
- A queue driver (recommended: Redis, database, or SQS)

## Installation

```bash
composer require adminintelligence/laravel-log-shipper
```

## Configuration

Publish the configuration file:

```bash
php artisan vendor:publish --tag=log-shipper-config
```

Add the following to your `.env` file:

```
LOG_SHIPPER_ENABLED=true
LOG_SHIPPER_ENDPOINT=https://your-log-server.com/api/ingest
LOG_SHIPPER_KEY=your-project-api-key
LOG_SHIPPER_QUEUE=redis
LOG_SHIPPER_QUEUE_NAME=logs
```

## Usage

Add the log shipper channel to your `config/logging.php`:

```php
'channels' => [
    'stack' => [
        'driver' => 'stack',
        'channels' => ['daily', 'log_shipper'],
        'ignore_exceptions' => false,
    ],

    'log_shipper' => [
        'driver' => 'custom',
        'via' => \AdminIntelligence\LogShipper\Logging\CreateCustomLogger::class,
        'level' => 'error', // Only ship errors and above
    ],
    
    // ... other channels
],
```

Now any log at the configured level or above will be shipped to your central server:

```php
Log::error('Something went wrong', ['order_id' => 123]);
```

## Configuration Options

| Option | Description | Default |
|--------|-------------|---------|
| `enabled` | Enable/disable log shipping | `true` |
| `api_endpoint` | The URL of your log server | - |
| `api_key` | Your project's API key | - |
| `queue_connection` | Queue connection to use | `default` |
| `queue_name` | Queue name for log jobs | `default` |
| `sanitize_fields` | Fields to redact from logs | See config |
| `send_context` | Context data to include | See config |

## Log Payload

When a log event is shipped, the following data is sent:

### Core Log Data (Always Sent)

| Field | Type | Description |
|-------|------|-------------|
| `level` | string | Log level (error, warning, info, debug, etc.) |
| `message` | string | The log message |
| `context` | array | Any context array passed to the log call |
| `datetime` | string | Timestamp in `Y-m-d H:i:s.u` format |
| `channel` | string | The logging channel name |
| `extra` | array | Additional Monolog processor data |

### Optional Context Data

These fields can be toggled via the `send_context` configuration:

| Field | Type | Default | Description |
|-------|------|---------|-------------|
| `user_id` | int\|null | enabled | Authenticated user's ID |
| `ip_address` | string\|null | enabled | Client IP address |
| `user_agent` | string\|null | enabled | Browser/client user agent string |
| `request_method` | string\|null | enabled | HTTP method (GET, POST, PUT, DELETE, etc.) |
| `request_url` | string\|null | enabled | Full request URL including query string |
| `route_name` | string\|null | enabled | Laravel route name |
| `controller_action` | string\|null | enabled | Controller and action handling the request |
| `app_env` | string\|null | enabled | Application environment (local, staging, production) |
| `app_debug` | bool\|null | enabled | Whether debug mode is enabled |
| `referrer` | string\|null | enabled | HTTP Referer header |

To disable specific context fields, update your `config/log-shipper.php`:

```php
'send_context' => [
    'user_id' => true,
    'ip_address' => true,
    'user_agent' => false, // disabled
    // ...
],
```

### Example Log Payload

Here is an example of the JSON payload sent for a log event:

```json
{
    "level": "error",
    "message": "Order processing failed",
    "context": {
        "order_id": 12345,
        "reason": "Payment declined"
    },
    "datetime": "2025-12-11 14:30:45.123456",
    "channel": "local",
    "extra": {},
    "user_id": "1",
    "ip_address": "127.0.0.1",
    "user_agent": "Mozilla/5.0...",
    "request_method": "POST",
    "request_url": "https://api.example.com/orders",
    "route_name": "orders.store",
    "controller_action": "App\\Http\\Controllers\\OrderController@store",
    "app_env": "production",
    "app_debug": false
}
```

## Status Monitoring

The package can automatically push system health metrics to your log server on a configurable interval. This helps you monitor the health of your application instances.

### Enable Status Push

Add the following to your `.env` file:

```env
LOG_SHIPPER_STATUS_ENABLED=true
LOG_SHIPPER_STATUS_ENDPOINT=https://your-log-server.com/api/stats
LOG_SHIPPER_STATUS_INTERVAL=5 # minutes (default: 5)
```

You can also configure the disk path to monitor:

```env
LOG_SHIPPER_DISK_PATH=/
```

#### Interval Configuration

The `LOG_SHIPPER_STATUS_INTERVAL` setting supports flexible scheduling:

| Interval | Behavior | Example |
|----------|----------|---------|
| 1-59 | Every N minutes | `5` = Every 5 minutes |
| 60-1439 | Every N hours | `120` = Every 2 hours, `180` = Every 3 hours |
| 1440+ | Daily | `1440` = Daily at midnight |

The scheduler automatically selects the appropriate cron expression based on your interval value.

### Collected Metrics

> **Note:** Status pushing relies on Laravel's scheduler. Ensure you have the scheduler running:
> `* * * * * cd /path-to-your-project && php artisan schedule:run >> /dev/null 2>&1`

### Example Status Payload

Here is an example of the JSON payload sent for a status update:

```json
{
    "timestamp": "2025-12-11T14:30:45+00:00",
    "app_name": "Laravel",
    "app_env": "production",
    "instance_id": "web-server-01",
    "system": {
        "memory_usage": 25165824,
        "memory_peak": 26214400,
        "php_version": "8.3.0",
        "laravel_version": "11.0.0",
        "uptime": 86400,
        "disk_space": {
            "total": 100000000000,
            "free": 60000000000,
            "used": 40000000000,
            "percent_used": 40.0
        }
    },
    "queue": {
        "size": 15,
        "connection": "redis"
    },
    "database": {
        "status": "connected",
        "latency_ms": 1.2
    },
    "cache": {
        "driver": "redis"
    },
    "filesize": {
        "laravel.log": 102400
    }
}
```

## Data Sanitization jobs count (excluding the status job itself)
- **Database**: Connection status and latency
- **Cache**: Active cache driver
- **Filesize**: Sizes of specific monitored files (configurable)

To configure which metrics are sent or to monitor specific files, publish the config and update the `status` section:

```php
'status' => [
    'metrics' => [
        'system' => true,
        'queue' => true,
        'database' => true,
        'cache' => true,
        'filesize' => true,
    ],

    'monitored_disk_path' => '/',

    'monitored_files' => [
        storage_path('logs/laravel.log'),
        storage_path('logs/worker.log'),
    ],
],
```

> **Note:** Status pushing relies on Laravel's scheduler. Ensure you have the scheduler running:
> `* * * * * cd /path-to-your-project && php artisan schedule:run >> /dev/null 2>&1`

## Data Sanitization

The package automatically redacts sensitive fields from your logs. The following field patterns are redacted by default:

| Field Pattern | Examples |
|---------------|----------|
| `password` | password, user_password, password_hash |
| `password_confirmation` | password_confirmation |
| `credit_card` | credit_card, credit_card_number |
| `card_number` | card_number |
| `cvv` | cvv, card_cvv |
| `api_key` | api_key, stripe_api_key |
| `secret` | secret, client_secret |
| `token` | token, access_token, refresh_token |
| `authorization` | authorization |

Add additional fields to sanitize in the config file:

```php
'sanitize_fields' => [
    'password',
    'credit_card',
    'ssn', // add your own
    // ...
],
```

## Sync Mode

By default, logs are shipped via queued jobs for better performance. If you prefer synchronous shipping (useful for debugging or simple setups), set:

```env
LOG_SHIPPER_QUEUE=sync
```

> **Note:** Sync mode will block your application until the HTTP request completes. Use queued mode in production for better performance.

## Contributing

Please see [CONTRIBUTING.md](CONTRIBUTING.md) for details.

## Security

If you discover a security vulnerability, please see [SECURITY.md](SECURITY.md) for reporting instructions.

## License

The MIT License (MIT). Please see [LICENSE](LICENSE) for more information.
